arXiv:2608.24650v2 [cs.AR] 26 Aug 2026

Simthesizer: An Agent-Driven Simulation
Framework for LLM Serving Systems
Wonung Kim†
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
wukim@casys.kaist.ac.kr

Hyunmin Choi†
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
hmchoi@casys.kaist.ac.kr

Minsu Kim
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
mskim@casys.kaist.ac.kr

Jaehong Cho
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
jhcho@casys.kaist.ac.kr

Yeongwook Kim
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
ywkim@casys.kaist.ac.kr

Jongse Park
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
jspark@casys.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract—System-level simulation is an essential tool for exploring the rapidly expanding design space of LLM serving systems, where real deployments remain costly and often infeasible.
However, modern LLM serving now evolves faster than humandriven simulator development can track, and emerging workloads
and mechanisms, from agentic workflows to disaggregated serving, no longer fit the monolithic simulation pipeline that existing
simulators assume. Each new mechanism therefore demands an
invasive rewrite, leaving a widening development gap between
deployed serving systems and the simulators that model them.
To close this gap, we present Simthesizer, a framework
that realizes agent-driven simulator development. Simthesizer
introduces a composable simulator infrastructure that uniformly
expresses the complete serving workflow, including the control
decisions that coordinate it, and realizes it as a unified dynamic
graph in Simthesizer simulator. Synthesizer agent, a harnessed
coding agent, then lowers natural-language feature requests onto
this abstraction under simulator-specific guardrails and fidelity
validation, evolving one shared simulator instead of building
a new one for every feature. Under the same coding agent
and harnesses, extensions built on Simthesizer follow a vLLMbased real system with 2.51% average throughput error, versus
6.03% for extensions built on existing simulators. On identical
workloads, Simthesizer also simulates up to 284.96× and 23.19×
faster than two state-of-the-art simulators, LLMServingSim2.0
and Vidur, respectively.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Designing efficient LLM serving systems requires exploring
an expanding design space spanning hardware, scheduling, and
system optimizations. Evaluating these choices on real systems
is often prohibitively expensive and difficult to scale, especially as emerging hardware accelerators are not yet available
as off-the-shelf platforms. Even when deployable, bringing
such systems up requires substantial engineering effort and
cost. As a result, system-level simulation has become an
essential tool for LLM serving research, enabling rapid and
cost-effective exploration of design trade-offs [1], [6], [7].
However, these simulators are now challenged by a fundamental shift in LLM serving, from the traditional singleinference execution flow to diverse and dynamic workflows.
† These authors contributed equally.

Implement Feature A

Implement Feature A

User

User

Add/Edit

Debug

DAG

Scheduler

Memory

High-level Abstraction

Network

Execution

Agent Lowering

</> Low-level
Implementation

(a) Existing LLM Serving
Simulators

Executable Simulation

(b) Simthesizer Framework

Fig. 1. (a) Existing LLM serving simulators require manually implementing
new serving mechanisms as they emerge, leading to low-level modifications,
while (b) Simthesizer framework instead composes the complete serving
workflow from uniform elements of a unified dynamic DAG, which is
automatically lowered into executable simulation through agent-driven development.

This shift transforms both the pace at which serving systems
evolve and the way requests and serving mechanisms are
structured, demanding a rethinking of system-level simulator
design. Specifically, it introduces two key changes:
1) Fast evolution: The LLM ecosystem evolves at a fast pace
as new models, applications, and system-level optimizations
continuously emerge. Serving techniques and execution
patterns consequently change over time, rapidly invalidating a simulator’s assumptions about system behavior and
requiring repeated manual effort to keep it up to date.
2) Non-monolithic serving: Agentic requests expand a single
query into multiple model invocations interleaved with
external tool calls and decision-making stages, following
dynamic execution paths determined by intermediate results.
Meanwhile, serving mechanisms such as disaggregated execution and speculative decoding break the once-monolithic
inference flow into multiple interacting stages. Both trends
replace the predetermined serving flow that existing simulators assume with dynamically composed stages.
To cope with these challenges, it is natural to ask whether

existing LLM serving simulators can keep up, but they are
fundamentally limited. Most simulators rest on two premises,
that serving systems evolve slowly enough for manual engineering to keep pace and that serving behavior can be
captured by a single monolithic simulation pipeline. As the two
changes above invalidate these premises, every non-monolithic
mechanism now forces an invasive restructuring of the fixed
simulation pipeline, while tracking fast evolution leaves developers repeatedly modifying and validating simulator internals.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel framework, Simthesizer, for developing modern LLM serving simulators, as illustrated in Figure 1. Our approach captures
non-monolithic serving through a composable and extensible
simulator infrastructure that uniformly expresses the complete
serving workflow, and tracks fast evolution through agentdriven lowering that translates natural language specifications
into executable simulation. Our contributions are as follows:
(1) Composable and extensible simulator infrastructure
for LLM serving simulation. We introduce Simthesizer
simulator, a simulator infrastructure that expresses every
element of the serving workflow, rather than only its
compute and communication operations, in one uniform,
composable form. Simthesizer simulator realizes this design as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where logical nodes
express control decisions such as request routing and batch
formation alongside compute and communication nodes.
A modular control layer implements these decisions as
interchangeable components, so new serving mechanisms
are integrated by composing components and reconnecting
nodes without restructuring the execution engine.
(2) Agent-driven lowering for scalable simulator extension. We develop Synthesizer agent, a harnessed coding
agent that systematically lowers high-level specifications
into executable simulation logic, bridging the gap between
specified behavior and low-level execution. Instead of manually implementing new system behaviors, our approach
exposes structured interfaces and modular components that
agents extend or compose, guided by harness engineering
that constrains task scope, enabling reliable integration of
emerging serving mechanisms.
(3) End-to-end implementation and verification of an
extensible simulator. We implement Simthesizer endto-end, combining Simthesizer simulator and Synthesizer
agent into a complete framework for developing and extending LLM serving simulators. To extend the simulator,
Synthesizer agent refines a natural language feature request
into a specification, maps it onto Simthesizer simulator’s
abstractions, implements any missing functionality, and
validates the result against real-system measurements or
reference evidence. We demonstrate this workflow by
extending Simthesizer simulator with Synthesizer agent
across modern serving mechanisms, including KV cache
quantization, speculative decoding, and hybrid Mamba
model support, evolving one shared simulator rather than
building a new one per feature.

We instruct OpenAI Codex [33] to serve as Synthesizer
agent, extending Simthesizer simulator with new serving features and implementing the same features on existing simulators with the same set of harnesses. Comparing the resulting
extensions, we find that Simthesizer more closely follows the
behaviors of a vLLM-based real system, achieving an average
throughput error of 2.51%, whereas extensions built on existing simulators exhibit a significantly higher throughput error
of 6.03%. Lastly, using identical LLM workloads, Simthesizer
achieves up to 284.96× and 23.19× faster simulation time
than two state-of-the-art simulators, LLMServingSim2.0 [6]
and Vidur [1], respectively.
These results demonstrate that our framework effectively
supports the development and extension of modern LLM
serving simulators, enabling accurate and extensible modeling
of complex and rapidly evolving workloads. While our evaluation focuses on LLM serving simulation, the combination of
composable simulator infrastructure and agent-driven lowering
suggests a promising direction for building simulators in
other systems domains. We view this work as an initial step
toward such a direction, and hope it encourages further exploration of more scalable and automated simulation methodologies. Simthesizer is available at https://github.com/casyskaist/Simthesizer.
II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
A. LLM Serving Simulation
Challenges in evaluating LLM serving systems. As the scale
and complexity of LLM serving systems continue to grow,
their design space has expanded to encompass a wide range of
deployment choices, including parallelism strategies [34], [45],
[58], scheduling policies [2], [41], [53], batch formation [2],
[53], [59], KV-cache management [8], [16], [20], [35], and
workload composition [52], [54]. However, evaluating these
choices on real systems is often prohibitively expensive and
difficult to scale. Moreover, many candidate designs, including
emerging accelerators, interconnects, and cluster configurations, are not yet available for direct measurement.
Simulation for LLM serving. To address these challenges, the
systems community has turned to system-level simulators as a
practical means of exploring design trade-offs in LLM serving
systems [1], [6], [7], [28]. These simulators allow researchers
to explore and validate early ideas across scheduling, hardware
architectures, and system configurations before implementation or deployment [5], [19], [34], [58].
Vidur [1] predicts LLM inference performance across parallelism strategies, batch sizes, and scheduling policies using
a random-forest model trained on profiled GPU operator
latencies. Similarly, APEX [28] predicts performance across
models, quantization formats, batching policies, and devicecluster configurations. To do so, it constructs candidate serving
configurations using predefined modules and feeds them to
its simulator. LLMServingSim [7] and LLMServingSim2.0 [6]
model additional modern serving mechanisms, including prefix
caching, prefill/decode disaggregation, and KV-cache offloading, through higher-level abstractions.

Workload
Fixed
Inference

Programmable

LLM Inference
Disaggregated Serving

Tree-based

Speculative Decoding

Suﬃx-decoding

Cache Management

Serving Architecture
Monolithic
Serving

Workload

User Query

App defined

Decoding Mechanism
Baseline
Decoding

System

P/D Disagg.
A/F Disagg.

(a) Fast Evolution

Tool
Calls

Sub
Agent

Refine

Answer

(b) Non-monolithic Serving

Fig. 2. Shifts in modern LLM serving: (a) fast evolution and (b) nonmonolithic serving.

Two outdated premises. Although these simulators adopt
different abstractions, they all encode serving behavior as
components that human developers implement in advance and
integrate into a fixed simulation pipeline. This shared design
remains practical only under two premises: (1) the target
serving system evolves slowly, and (2) serving behavior can
be captured by a monolithic simulation pipeline. The first
premise assumes that new serving behaviors arise infrequently
enough to amortize the substantial human effort required to
implement them. The second assumes that a single, tightly
integrated control flow can encode diverse serving techniques
as predefined policies. As we discuss in Section II-B, however,
the rapid evolution of serving mechanisms and the shift toward
non-monolithic serving call both premises into question.
B. The Shifting Landscape of LLM Serving
Modern LLM serving is shifting along two coupled directions: (1) its workloads and mechanisms evolve at an
unprecedented pace, and (2) many of them no longer take
the form of a monolithic inference flow.
Fast evolution. First, LLM workloads and serving mechanisms now evolve rapidly and concurrently across every
level of the serving stack. In just a few years, agentic
workloads have pushed serving systems from fixed inference
flows [20] toward programmable, application-defined workflows [9], [27]. Over the same period, speculative decoding
has raced through successive generations, from conventional
draft-and-verify methods to tree-based and suffix-decoding
schemes [21], [23]–[25], [30], [32]. Serving architectures
likewise keep diversifying toward P/D and attention–FFN
disaggregation [34], [58], [60]. Each new wave arrives before
the previous one settles into standard practice.
Non-monolithic serving. Second, many emerging workloads
and serving mechanisms no longer fit within a single, selfcontained inference lifecycle. On the workload side, as shown
in Figure 2, agentic requests expand a single user query into
multiple LLM inferences interleaved with external tool calls,
sub-agent execution, and iterative context refinement [13],
[37], [39], [40], [46], [51]. A request is thus no longer a
single inference call but a runtime-dependent composition
of inference and non-inference stages. On the system side,

disaggregated serving splits prefill and decode across separate
machine pools [34], [58], speculative decoding coordinates
draft and target models within a decoding loop [21], [30], and
KV-cache management distributes request state across turns
and storage tiers [8], [14], [44]. Despite optimizing different
resources, they all replace the self-contained inference lifecycle with orchestration across separately managed components.
Implications for existing simulators. These two trends undermine the premises of existing simulators. New serving behaviors emerge faster than human developers can implement,
integrate, and validate them, leaving a widening development
gap between deployed serving systems and the simulators
that model them. Meanwhile, non-monolithic serving breaks
the fixed serving loop that existing simulators assume every
request follows (Section II-A). A feature that falls outside
this loop therefore requires restructuring its control flow and
propagating changes across existing paths.
C. Rethinking Simulation Design for Modern LLM Serving
Agent-driven simulator development. Both implications ultimately stem from a shortage of engineering labor. Fast
evolution multiplies how often developers must extend a
simulator to close the development gap, while non-monolithic
serving turns each extension into an invasive rewrite. Sustaining simulators against both pressures calls for automating the
implementation work itself. Recent LLM-based coding agents
make this automation practical, and the systems community
already employs them [4], [48], [57]. We therefore envision
agent-driven simulator development, in which coding agents
implement new serving mechanisms as they emerge.
However, simply adding an AI agent to existing simulators
is insufficient. Bound to a monolithic pipeline, an agent inherits the same structural coupling, so each extension remains
a broad, system-wide rewriting that is difficult to review
and may introduce silent regressions. Keeping modifications
local requires a representation that captures inference and
non-inference stages, and the control flow coordinating them
within a single abstraction. Even then, generated code that
compiles and passes functional tests can still model the wrong
system, demanding simulator-specific guardrails and fidelity
validation. From these requirements, we derive two design
principles for next-generation serving simulators:
• (Principle 1) Composable simulation from a uniform
representation. Existing simulators bind serving mechanisms to technique-specific control paths, making each extension a system-wide change. A modern simulator should
instead express workloads and mechanisms in a uniform,
composable representation that captures stages, dependencies, and state transitions, allowing humans or agents to
add and compose components without restructuring the
execution engine.
• (Principle 2) Guarded agent-driven implementation.
Structural locality bounds an agent’s changes, but does
not ensure simulation fidelity, as an extension can compile
and produce plausible outputs while omitting performancecritical state or violating simulator-specific invariants. A

Input
Implement
Feature A

Simthesizer Framework

Output

Validation
TTFT ITL Tok/s

Documents
Design

Synthesizer
Agent
Harness

Validation

Simthesizer
Simulator

Simthesizer
Simulator

Feature A

Feature A

(a) Simthesizer Framework

Simthesizer Simulator

Synthesizer Agent

Modular Control Layer
Scheduler Router Model

Harnessed Lowering
Task
Sim
Sim
Design
Mapping
Dev

Dynamic DAG API
Unified Dynamic DAG
Comp.
Logic.
Logic.
Comm.

Guided Validation
Trace
Reference

(b) Simthesizer Simulator

(c) Synthesizer Agent

Fig. 3. Overview of the Simthesizer framework.

modern simulator must therefore pair bounded extension
interfaces and simulator-specific guardrails with validation
methods that evaluate simulation semantics.
III. OVERVIEW OF S IMTHESIZER
Guided by these principles, we present Simthesizer, a
simulation framework that realizes agent-driven simulator
development for modern LLM serving. Simthesizer pairs a
composable, extensible simulation substrate (Principle 1) with
a guarded agent workflow (Principle 2), as illustrated in
Figure 3.
Simthesizer framework. Simthesizer comprises two components, (1) Simthesizer simulator, a unified and extensible LLM
serving simulator, and (2) Synthesizer agent, a harnessed coding agent that integrates new serving mechanisms into Simthesizer simulator. The workflow begins with a user request
specifying the feature to implement. Synthesizer agent refines
the intended behavior, maps it onto Simthesizer simulator’s abstractions, and implements any functionality Simthesizer simulator does not already provide. Then, Simthesizer validates
the observed behavior against real-system measurements or
reference evidence. The workflow finally returns the extended
Simthesizer simulator together with inspectable artifacts exposing its modeling decisions, implementation decisions, and
validation results.
Simthesizer simulator. Existing simulators use static DAGs
and pipelines to encode compute and communication operations, so any mechanism that alters this pipeline demands
an invasive, end-to-end redesign. To address this, Simthesizer
simulator composes the entire serving workflow from a uniform set of elements, using compute, communication, and
logical nodes of a unified dynamic DAG to capture both LLM
operations and the control decisions. Through Dynamic DAG
APIs, logical nodes insert operations and rewire dependencies
at runtime, allowing Simthesizer simulator to integrate new
mechanisms and express runtime-dependent workflows without modifying the execution engine. Above this substrate, a
modular control layer implements serving policies through interchangeable components such as schedulers, routers, model
runners, and resource simulators. Existing components compose through structured configuration, and a new mechanism
requires implementing only the behavior the control layer
lacks (Section IV).
Synthesizer agent. Synthesizer agent is a coding agent with
a harness tailored to developing LLM serving simulators. It

Compute

System
Scheduler Model
Control Layer
Interface
Execution Layer
Engine

DAG

DAG

Model Runner
Compute Network

Comm.

Event
Queue

Event Queue

Logical

Engine
Execute

Next

Fig. 4. Architecture of Simthesizer simulator.

lowers a user request through three stages, task-design,
sim-mapping, and sim-dev, which respectively produce a
simulator-facing specification, map each decision to a Simthesizer simulator abstraction, and extend the implementation.
The agent then evaluates simulation fidelity through traceguided validation when real-system measurements are available and reference-guided validation otherwise. Users may
resolve performance-critical ambiguities and review the specification, implementation map, and validation report, while
Synthesizer agent performs the low-level implementation and
revision work. Together, Simthesizer simulator and Synthesizer agent make simulator extension both compositional and
reviewable, allowing Simthesizer to track new serving mechanisms without restructuring a monolithic simulation pipeline
(Section V).
IV. S IMTHESIZER S IMULATOR
Figure 4 shows the two-layer architecture of the Simthesizer
simulator. The execution layer realizes the composable simulator infrastructure as a unified dynamic DAG that represents an
LLM serving workflow, allowing new mechanisms to extend
the graph without restructuring the execution engine. The
control layer constructs and modifies these graphs through
modular components that implement serving policies. This
separation gives Simthesizer simulator a stable execution
substrate while its serving behavior evolves through localized
extensions.
A. Unified Dynamic DAG Abstraction
Execution graph representation. Simthesizer simulator represents the complete simulated execution as a unified dynamic
DAG with three node types: (1) compute nodes that specify
which model operation executes on which device, (2) communication nodes for inter-device transfers, and (3) logical nodes
for policy events such as request arrival and scheduling. Each

TABLE I
DYNAMIC DAG MODIFICATION API S .
Interface

Description

add_logical_node(operation, state) -> node
add_logical_node_at(operation, state, at) -> node

Insert a logical node carrying a policy operation and its state. The _at
variant seeds an explicit start time, e.g., for request arrival.

add_compute_node(layer, batch) -> node

Insert a compute node tagged with a semantic layer descriptor and the
scheduled batch state.

add_network_node(src, dst, bytes) -> node

Insert a point-to-point transfer between two network devices. Its timing
model resolves latency, including multi-hop routing when configured.

add_edge(parent, child)

Declare a precedence constraint. A child becomes runnable only after
all of its predecessors complete.

pop_edges(node) -> list[node]

Detach the current node’s outgoing edges so the caller can splice a new
subgraph before the original successor.

edge encodes an execution-order dependency, and simulation
executes each node once all of its predecessors complete.
Node taxonomy. At execution, each node differs along two
dimensions: (1) latency is deterministic when fixed at dispatch
and non-deterministic when later activity can change the
completion time, and (2) behavior is stateful when execution
alters subsequent control flow or updates serving state and
stateless otherwise. The three node types occupy distinct
points in this taxonomy, which determines how the execution
layer processes each of them.
Compute nodes. Simthesizer simulator treats compute nodes
as deterministic and stateless by construction. A compute
node represents an already scheduled model operation on
a target device, with shared-device ordering encoded by its
dependencies. Once runnable, its operation, batch, and device
model determine a single latency, and kernel-level effects
remain encapsulated within that latency model.
Communication nodes. Communication nodes are nondeterministic and stateless, as link contention can affect their
completion time while their execution leaves state unchanged.
To model non-deterministic latency, Simthesizer simulator
allows the network model to invalidate a node’s scheduled
completion event when resource state changes and to provide a revised completion time for rescheduling. This eventinvalidation interface supports dynamic contention without
binding the execution layer to a particular network model.
Logical nodes. Logical nodes are deterministic and stateful.
They encode control decisions such as request routing, batch
formation, and state transitions, with a fixed execution latency
and explicit updates to request or system state. Existing
simulators implement these decisions in fixed control flow
outside their compute and communication DAGs; Simthesizer
simulator instead makes them first-class nodes in the execution
graph. A new serving workflow can therefore be constructed
by adding and reconnecting compute, communication, and
logical nodes, leaving the core execution engine untouched.
Event-driven processing. The execution layer processes all
node types through a common event-driven loop. It first
initializes simulated time and inserts every node with no
unresolved predecessor into a time-ordered event queue. At
each step, it dequeues the earliest event, advances simulated

time, and processes the corresponding node. A deterministic
node schedules a fixed completion event at dispatch, whereas
a change in resource state can invalidate and replace the
completion event of a non-deterministic node. A stateful node
may additionally update serving state or modify the execution
graph. Upon completion, the execution layer propagates the
node’s completion time to its successors, resolves incoming
dependencies, and enqueues each newly runnable node.
B. Dynamic DAG APIs
LLM serving is inherently dynamic, as batch composition,
placement, and even the stages a request traverses depend
on runtime state, so a simulator cannot enumerate every
operation and dependency in advance. Existing simulators
sidestep this dynamism by keeping runtime decisions in a fixed
simulation pipeline outside their compute and communication
DAGs [1], [6], [7], [28]. Simthesizer simulator instead lets
logical nodes grow the graph as decisions become known,
using the Dynamic DAG APIs in Table I to insert new nodes
and rewire dependencies, keeping workflow changes localized.
Node construction. Dynamic expansion first materializes
each runtime-selected action as one of the three node types.
add_logical_node records the operation and state for
a policy event, add_compute_node records the semantic layer and scheduled batch, and add_network_node
records the source, destination, and transfer size. Each API
returns a node handle for later connections, and these typed
constructors keep newly added nodes consistent with the
execution semantics of the initial graph.
Dependency construction. Creating nodes alone does not
determine when they execute; the add_edge(parent,
child) API specifies that the child can run only after the
parent completes. A logical node may also alter existing
dependencies; in disaggregated serving, for example, a decode
stage already follows its prefill stage, but assigning decode
to another machine requires a KV-cache transfer to complete
in between. The pop_edges API detaches and returns the
prefill node’s outgoing edges, letting the logical node splice in
the transfer node and reconnect the decode stage after it. This
local rewrite preserves the surrounding graph while enforcing
the new execution order.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

interface System extends Logical:
into_results() -> list[result]
Logical::handle(...) -> time
interface Scheduler:
enqueue_sub_request(sub_request)
schedule() -> batch

(a) Component interfaces
1 impl System for SingleInstance:
2
scheduler: Scheduler
3
4
def into_results() -> list[result]
5
def Logical::handle(...) -> time
6
7 impl Scheduler for ChunkedPrefill:
8
enable_prefix_caching: bool
9
10
def enqueue_sub_request(sub_request)
11
def schedule() -> batch

(b) Component implementations
1
2
3
4
5

system:
kind = "SingleInstance"
scheduler:
kind = "ChunkedPrefill"
enable_prefix_caching = true

(c) Compositional configuration
Fig. 5. Examples of (a) abstract interfaces capturing general serving behaviors; (b) concrete implementations of interfaces with encapsulated states;
and (c) structured configuration composing implementations and defining
component-specific parameters.

C. Modular Control Layer
Components own serving roles. The Dynamic DAG APIs
define how the execution graph can grow at runtime, but not
who grows it. A single handler making every serving decision
would recreate a monolithic pipeline above the execution layer,
forcing each new mechanism to modify shared control code.
To address this, Simthesizer simulator partitions the control
layer into components, each owning one serving role such
as request routing, batch scheduling, or model execution.
Each component keeps its role’s policy state, handles that
role’s logical nodes, and materializes its decisions through
the Dynamic DAG APIs. This ownership confines each policy
change to the component that makes the decision.
Interfaces capture stable roles. Serving roles remain stable even as the policies filling them change rapidly; every
serving system forms batches, but the batching policy evolves
with each new mechanism. Simthesizer simulator therefore
fixes each role’s operations in an interface and leaves policy and state to concrete implementations. In Figure 5(a),
System orchestrates one serving instance, handling its logical events through handle and emitting results through
into_results. Scheduler owns iteration-level batching,
receiving sub-requests through enqueue_sub_request
and returning the next batch through schedule. Because
System depends only on this interface, any conforming
scheduler can fill the same position in the hierarchy.
Implementations encapsulate policy state. A policy is more
than a function; it carries state such as request queues, cache
metadata, and tuning parameters. If this state leaked across
components, replacing one policy would ripple through the
others. Simthesizer simulator therefore confines each policy’s

state to the implementation that realizes it (Figure 5(b)).
ChunkedPrefill implements Scheduler and privately
tracks its prefix-caching flag, while SingleInstance implements System, holding its scheduler only through the
interface. Swapping in another scheduler thus touches neither
SingleInstance nor the execution layer.
Configuration composes a system. A structured configuration assembles these components into a complete simulator
(Figure 5(c)). Each kind field selects an implementation for
one interface, nested entries select subcomponents, and the remaining fields set implementation-specific parameters. The example builds SingleInstance over ChunkedPrefill
and enables prefix caching without touching simulator code.
This composition bounds the cost of extending Simthesizer
simulator. When every required policy exists, a user or Synthesizer agent composes the target system through configuration
alone; when one is missing, Synthesizer agent implements
only that policy behind its interface and reuses the remaining components. An extension is thus a configuration edit
or a component-local implementation, never a control-layer
rewrite.
D. Implementation
Built-in components. We instantiate the control layer with
seven component interfaces that mirror a request’s path
through a serving system, namely request routing, system
orchestration, batch scheduling, model execution, model description, and compute and network timing. This mirroring
places every serving decision that a new mechanism may
change behind a distinct interface. Behind these interfaces,
Simthesizer simulator ships built-in implementations covering
common serving configurations.
At the system level, built-ins cover single- and multiinstance serving, prefill–decode disaggregation with explicit
KV-cache handoff, and expert-parallel MoE serving, with
routing policies that place requests round-robin or by perinstance load. Along the execution path, the built-in scheduler implements chunked prefill with memory-aware batch
admission and block-aligned prefix caching, model runners
expand each scheduled batch into layer-level compute and
communication nodes under tensor or expert parallelism, and
model descriptions cover dense and MoE architectures. These
built-ins reduce common serving studies to configuration,
reserving Synthesizer agent for new mechanisms.
Pluggable timing backends. The execution and control layers
consume completion times without depending on how they
are produced. This boundary lets detailed architecture and
network simulators [12], [17], [36], [42] serve as backends
when their fidelity is required, while Simthesizer simulator
provides lightweight defaults for end-to-end serving studies.
Profile-based compute backend. The default compute backend estimates each compute node’s latency from offline profiles [3], [6], [7], [22]. Because a single total-token key cannot
capture layers whose latency depends on more than batch size,
the backend indexes each layer type with at most two layerspecific keys, such as the cached KV footprint and query–

User Prompt
“Add feature A”

Tools

❶
Human
User

Synthesizer
Agent

❷

Interrupt user for
options/details

❸

</>

❷

Search
Bash
File
MCP

Add details using
external tools

Spec. Document
“Describes how the target system behaves”
(a) /task-design
Spec. Document

❶

Expose relevant
contexts

Synthesizer ❷ Simulator
Agent
Codebase

❸

Map decisions to
implementation map

Spec. Document

Impl. Map

❶

Simulator
Impl. Codebase
Synthesizer ❷
Agent
Validate

Guardrails

❸

Impl. Map
“To Add Feature A, …”

Simulator w/ New Feature A

(b) /sim-mapping

(c) /sim-dev

Fig. 6. Agent-driven simulator extension process.

context interaction count for attention or the token count and
activated experts for MoE. The profiler samples these keys
offline and interpolates over the table.
Flow-based network backend. The default network backend
models communication at flow granularity rather than simulating individual packets [22]; each transfer follows a routed
path over a device–link connectivity graph and receives the
minimum available bandwidth along it. When a flow starts
or completes, the backend recomputes the affected bandwidths and reschedules completion events through the eventinvalidation interface (Section IV-A). Because both backends
sit behind component interfaces, either can be replaced without
changing the execution layer or serving policies.

V. S YNTHESIZER AGENT
Grounded in Simthesizer simulator, Simthesizer translates
natural language specifications into executable simulation
through agent-driven development that keeps pace with fastevolving serving mechanisms. Synthesizer agent realizes this
lowering by wrapping a coding agent in a harness tailored to
developing LLM serving simulators, leveraging Simthesizer
simulator’s modular interfaces to extend the simulator without
reworking its internals. The harness makes simulator-specific
constraints explicit and organizes synthesis around three inspectable artifacts: a specification, an implementation map,
and a validation report. This design shifts human judgment
from low-level code editing to resolving performance-critical
ambiguities and reviewing implementation decisions and validation evidence. We first describe the synthesis requirements
and lowering process, then present two validation regimes and
their human review points.

A. Simulator-Specific Synthesis Requirements
Synthesis begins when the user asks Synthesizer agent to
integrate a new serving mechanism. However, the initial request alone rarely resolves the modeling decisions needed for
a faithful implementation, leaving performance-critical choices
implicit even though they directly affect simulation behavior.
We identify three recurring requirements for translating the
request into an implementation that captures the intention:
• Semantic completeness. The simulator-facing specification
must identify the quantities and assumptions that determine
simulation time, resource contention, state lifetime, dependency structure, and metric boundaries. Each performancerelevant choice must be either resolved in the specification
or surfaced explicitly for human review.
• Structural alignment. Each modeling decision must map
to the Simthesizer simulator abstraction responsible for the
corresponding state transition, graph update, or resource
interaction. This mapping avoids scattering a mechanism
across unrelated control paths and preserves a traceable
connection between the specification and the generated
implementation.
• Modeling fidelity. The implementation must model the
serving mechanism at the level of detail required by the target performance question. When exact modeling is unavailable, it may introduce approximations, such as aggregate
multipliers or statistical proxies. The harness requires explicit assumptions, supporting evidence, and validity boundaries for each approximation.
B. Harnessed Lowering Process
Figure 6 shows Simthesizer’s lowering stages for meeting
the synthesis requirements: task-design, sim-mapping,
and sim-dev. Each stage addresses a distinct requirement
and produces documents that record the corresponding decisions. This linkage routes each issue back to the stage where
the relevant decision was made, rather than treating every issue
as an implementation bug.
(1) task-design. The first stage targets semantic completeness by refining the initial user request into a simulator-facing
specification. Synthesizer agent consults available mechanism
descriptions, external sources, and Simthesizer simulator interfaces. It specifies the target configuration, states, dependencies,
metrics, and the assumptions and evidence for any approximation. The resulting specification document records resolved
decisions and explicit modeling boundaries and remains in the
synthesis context throughout subsequent stages.
(2) sim-mapping. The second stage targets structural alignment by mapping the simulator-facing specification to the corresponding Simthesizer simulator components and interfaces.
The resulting implementation map records where state resides,
which Dynamic DAG operations encode dependencies, which
components model compute and communication, and which
observable signals support subsequent validation. Rather than
a sequence of code edits, the map ties each modeling decision
to the Simthesizer simulator abstraction responsible for the
behavior, its implementation site, and its validation strategy.

TABLE II
I MPLEMENTATION MAP FOR SPECULATIVE DECODING .

[Target System Config]
scheduler
= chunked_prefill + prefix_caching
speculative_width
= K=2
[Modeling Input]
algorithm_reference = EAGLE-3
acceptance_model
= empirical distribution
sampling
= stochastic

Behavior

Implementation map

Target model
verification

Route W through the existing request representation
to the model runner and compute simulator.

[Simulator Semantics]
remaining_output
= R
verification_width = W = min(K + 1, R)
accepted_drafts
= A ∼ pacc
committed_progress = M = A + 1
target_compute
= evaluate W positions
persistent_state
= advance and retain M tokens

Committed request
state

Assign M to scheduler-managed request and KV
state, exposing only the committed prefix to the
existing cache interface.

Speculation round
execution

Reuse the common DAG scheduling and execution
path without adding a mechanism-specific event
loop.

[Validation Protocol]
min_validation_step = 3
validation_data
= ShareGPT trace, system data

Fig. 7. Structured summary of the document produced by task-design.
The full specification presents the same content in natural language.

(3) sim-dev. The third stage implements the changes described in the implementation map and checks for deviations.
Synthesizer agent edits the simulator components and iterates
on compiler diagnostics, runtime failures, test results, and
violations of the specification. Simulator-specific guardrails
detect undeclared approximations, unexplained constants, and
code changes that depart from the implementation map. This
stage records the implemented behavior, approximations, and
uncertainties in the validation report for human review.
Synthesis-time human involvement. Most revisions proceed
without continuous human intervention. Incorrect component
mappings rewind the lowering process to sim-mapping,
while implementation bugs are resolved within sim-dev.
During task-design, the available references and simulator
context may be insufficient to resolve a performance-critical
modeling choice. In that case, Synthesizer agent requests
human clarification of the intended behavior, missing parameters, and modeling boundaries rather than silently selecting a
default. At the end of the synthesis run, the user reviews the
generated documents and, if necessary, revises the specification and initiates another run.
C. Evidence-Guided Validation
The harnessed Synthesizer agent produces a candidate simulator that is consistent with its specification and implementation map. However, this consistency does not guarantee that
the design itself faithfully captures the target mechanism.
Simthesizer addresses this gap through evidence-guided validation, which comprises the following two complementary
regimes.
Trace-guided validation. When real-system measurements
are available, Simthesizer compares the candidate simulator
with the system under the same workload, serving configurations, and hardware settings. It aligns internal execution
signals, such as queue length, batch composition, and resource
utilization, to identify the modeling decisions responsible for
the observed discrepancies. Together with the implementation
map, these signals help associate each divergence with the
corresponding scheduling, compute, communication, or dependency behavior. The validation report records the observed dis-

crepancies, their possible sources, and the modeling decisions
that require revision, providing concrete targets for the next
synthesis run.
Reference-guided validation. When comparable measurements are unavailable, as in cases involving unreleased hardware, unavailable software stacks, or novel mechanisms,
Simthesizer performs reference-guided validation by grounding its modeling decisions in available technical evidence.
Synthesizer agent derives performance criteria from reference
implementations, results reported in prior works, and other
evidence, then assesses whether the candidate simulator reproduces the expected behavior under comparable conditions.
The validation report identifies evidence-grounded decisions,
unresolved assumptions, and approximations that define the
validity boundary. Although this regime does not establish empirical agreement with the target system, it provides traceable
technical justification and exposes the remaining uncertainty.
VI. S IMULATOR S YNTHESIS IN ACTION
We explain how Simthesizer’s two core components jointly
support a concrete simulator extension using EAGLE-style
speculative decoding [25] as a case study. This mechanism
uses a lightweight drafter model to rapidly generate several
draft tokens. The target model then verifies drafted tokens in
a single inference iteration, while only the accepted tokens
advance the generation. Although this mechanism is concise at
the algorithmic level, its simulation must distinguish the work
performed by the target model from the progress made by each
request. We trace the interaction of Simthesizer simulator and
Synthesizer agent from the initial user request through semantic refinement, lowering, and validation-driven revision. Across
five synthesis runs, we follow a representative trial through
specification, mapping, implementation, and validation.
A. Resolving Simulator Semantics
The initial user request states target algorithmic details
including the number of draft tokens and the acceptance
model, but leaves some modeling decisions unspecified. Based
on the reference and the supplied statistics, task-design
resolves these decisions into explicit simulator semantics. For
example, Synthesizer agent derives four semantic variables
from the algorithm reference: the verification width W , the
remaining output length R, the accepted draft length A, and
the committed request progress M . Figure 7 presents the

vLLM

Generation Throughput (tok/s)

500

Simthesizer
1500
1000

250

500

0
0

30

60

90

120
150
Time (s)

180

210

240

0

0

30

60

(a) Dense-SWE

900

600

600

300

300
0

30

60

90

120
150
Time (s)

120
150
Time (s)

180

210

240

120
150
Time (s)

180

210

240

(b) Dense-tau

900

0

90

180

210

240

(c) MoE-SWE

0

0

30

60

90

(d) MoE-tau

Fig. 8. Comparison of throughput between unmodified Simthesizer (without any agent-synthesized extension) and a GPU-based serving system running vLLM
under agentic workloads: (a) Llama3.1 dense model on mini-SWE-bench, (b) Llama3.1 dense model on tau-bench, (c) Qwen3 MoE model on mini-SWE-bench,
and (d) Qwen3 MoE model on tau-bench.

example specification document generated by task-design
from an underspecified user request, capturing the resulting
modeling decisions and state semantics.
B. From Mapping to Implementation
sim-mapping maps the simulator-facing specification
onto the Simthesizer simulator components and interfaces,
recording the resulting mappings in an implementation map
for subsequent simulator development. Rather than adding
mechanism-specific machinery, Synthesizer agent localizes
extension logic within existing Simthesizer simulator components and minimizes the required changes. For example,
in speculative decoding, the map incorporates simulator semantics, W and M , into the existing request-processing and
scheduling mechanisms, while reusing the common DAG
scheduling and execution path. Table II summarizes this resulting map.
During the sim-dev stage, Synthesizer agent translates the
mapped design into localized simulator code changes guided
by the implementation map. The resulting extension introduces
no new events, node types, graph APIs, model-runner paths,
compute interfaces, cache APIs, or execution loops, leaving
most Simthesizer simulator components unchanged. Overall,
Simthesizer’s harnessed lowering process allows Synthesizer
agent to focus on the algorithmic details and state semantics
specific to speculative decoding, while Simthesizer simulator
supports them through its reusable components, cost models,
and interfaces.
C. Validation-Driven Revision
The synthesis run produces an executable candidate simulator. In this representative run, trace-guided validation found
that the candidate overestimated target system throughput by
13.4% on the validation trace. Inspecting its specification
and computation trace revealed that the synthesized implementation applied W only to the final layer and modeled
the remaining target model layers over K positions, causing
the candidate to underestimate the required compute and

communication. The validation evidence isolated the problem
to the verification-width semantics rather than the component
mapping or DAG execution path.
The validation report fed this finding back to Synthesizer
agent, which initiated another iteration to correct the semantic
error. With the corrected semantics, the subsequent candidate
showed a 6.7% throughput divergence from the real system
and underestimated aggregate throughput only by 4.7% on the
same validation trace. This case study shows how trace-guided
validation converts a simulation discrepancy into a semantic
correction while preserving the localized integration design.
D. Joint Effect
Simthesizer simulator provides reusable components for
scheduling, compute, cache management, and DAG execution,
while Synthesizer agent maps underspecified behavior onto
these components. In this speculative decoding case, this combination localizes mechanism-specific logic to the acceptance
policy and scheduler, preserves shared execution and resourcemodeling paths, and links observed performance discrepancies
to concrete modeling decisions. Together, the two components
of Simthesizer make simulator extension compositional and
reviewable, exposing each extension’s semantics, integration
choices, and validation evidence to human review.
VII. E VALUATION
Our evaluation answers five questions: (Q1) Can Simthesizer accurately model complex workloads such as agent serving? (Q2) Can Simthesizer faithfully implement features not
natively supported by Simthesizer simulator, and how much
does Simthesizer simulator contribute to simulation accuracy?
(Q3) How much does the Synthesizer agent harness contribute
to accuracy? (Q4) How fast does Simthesizer run LLM serving
simulations? (Q5) Does the workflow remain effective across
coding agents?
A. Methodology
Baselines. We compare Simthesizer against two state-ofthe-art LLM serving simulators: LLMServingSim2.0 [6] and

Generation
Throughput (tok/s)

vLLM
4K
3K
2K
1K
0

0

25

50
75
Time (s)

100

(a) KV Cache Quantization

Simthesizer
4K
3K
2K
1K
0

0

25

LLMServingSim2.0

50
75
Time (s)

100

(b) Speculative Decoding

9K
6K
3K
0

Vidur

0

25

50
75
Time (s)

100

(c) Hybrid-Mamba

Fig. 9. Throughput comparison of Simthesizer, LLMServingSim2.0, and Vidur each independently extended by the Synthesizer agent under a shared harness
and coding agent across three feature-extension tasks: (a) KV cache quantization, (b) speculative decoding, and (c) hybrid Mamba model support. Each panel
thus compares three distinct simulators extended with the same feature; the same convention applies to Fig. 10 and Fig. 11.

Vidur [1]. To evaluate agent-driven simulator extension, we define three feature-extension tasks unsupported by Simthesizer
simulator and both baselines: (1) FP8 KV cache quantization,
(2) EAGLE3-based speculative decoding [25], and (3) hybrid
Mamba model support. We use the Qwen3 32B model [47]
for the first two tasks and the Nemotron-3-Nano 30B-A3B
model [31] for the hybrid Mamba task. Within Simthesizer,
Synthesizer agent adds each requested feature directly to
Simthesizer simulator; for each baseline, the same coding
agent and harness add the same mechanism to the simulator’s
native implementation. We repeat each extension task over
multiple independent trials without human intervention and
report metrics averaged across trials to account for codingagent variability.
Synthesizer agent setup. Unless otherwise specified, we use
GPT-5.4 (xhigh), accessed through OpenAI Codex (v0.118.0),
as Synthesizer agent. Importantly, the Synthesizer agent harness does not encode any Simthesizer-specific information. For
fair comparison, we provide all three simulators with identical
prompts, references, specifications, and profiled model data.
Workloads and datasets. We sample 50–100 requests from
SWE-bench [15] and tau-bench [50], which are agentic workloads, and we sample 400 requests from ShareGPT [38] as
a non-agentic workload. For agentic workloads, we collect
output and tool-call trajectories from a real system matching
the simulated environment and replay them in the simulator.
System specifications. We conduct all experiments on a
machine equipped with two NVIDIA RTX Pro 6000 Blackwell
GPUs and an Intel Xeon Gold 6326 CPU. We use vLLM
(v0.19.1) as the LLM serving framework when evaluating the
real GPU-based serving system [20].
B. Evaluation Results
(Q1) Complex-workload fidelity. We evaluate whether
Simthesizer captures dynamic and complex workload behavior
by comparing it against a real GPU-based serving system
running vLLM on mini-SWE-bench and tau-bench. Both
benchmarks define their agentic workflows in a pre-defined
form, which Simthesizer models directly as multiple model
invocations interleaved with tool calls. For each tool call, we
execute it on the host in advance and record its latency, which
the simulation replays at the corresponding stage. Figure 8
illustrates the generation throughput over 240 seconds for the
Llama3.1 8B dense model [29] and the Qwen3 30B-A3B MoE
model [47].

TABLE III
E RROR RATES OF S IMTHESIZER PERFORMANCE METRICS RELATIVE TO
THE REAL SERVING SYSTEM ACROSS TWO WORKLOADS AND TWO
MODELS .

Error rate (%)
Mean TTFT
Median TTFT
Mean TPOT
Median TPOT
Mean ITL
Median ITL
Throughput
Running Time

mini-SWE-agent
tau-bench
Llama3.1-8B Qwen3-30B Llama3.1-8B Qwen3-30B
4.10
19.83
17.23
21.87
0.64
4.72
6.09
0.13
0.27
2.82
0.93
4.16
0.40
1.45
0.40
0.28
0.97
2.17
0.74
3.74
0.65
14.75
11.44
11.94
0.20
2.78
0.51
4.54
0.20
2.71
0.51
4.34

For the dense model (Figure 8(a) and (b)), the simulation
closely matches the real system, as dense execution is largely
deterministic. For the MoE model (Figure 8(c) and (d)), the
simulated throughput deviates more visibly. This discrepancy
arises from the statistical modeling of MoE routing; expert selection and synchronization under data and expert parallelism
are estimated from profiled statistics rather than actual requestspecific routing decisions. Nevertheless, Simthesizer captures
the interaction between LLM generation and tool calls and
closely follows the real system’s performance trends.
Table III reports the error rates of Simthesizer for TTFT,
TPOT, and ITL. TTFT and ITL exhibit higher errors than
TPOT because real systems involve tail-latency factors, such
as network traffic and kernel launch delays, that are difficult to simulate precisely. TPOT, which primarily reflects
generation-phase latency, shows lower error, indicating that
Simthesizer accurately models batching and scheduling, where
these system-level effects are less dominant. Despite these
hard-to-simulate system-level effects, Simthesizer closely reproduces the real system’s overall behavior across all metrics,
workloads, and models.
(Q2) Extension fidelity. We next evaluate the three featureextension tasks that Synthesizer agent adds to Simthesizer
simulator and to each baseline simulator. Figure 9 presents the
generation throughput, and Figure 10 shows the error rates of
key performance metrics across the three simulators.
For KV cache quantization, all simulators achieve low error
rates because the task primarily requires tracking memory
usage and modeling quantization overhead. In contrast, speculative decoding and hybrid Mamba support require coordinated changes across execution scheduling, model structure,

TPOT
5.71
1.55

ITL
11.05
5.28

and performance modeling. For these two tasks, Simthesizer
consistently achieves the highest accuracy, whereas the baselines exhibit substantially larger errors. This difference arises
because Simthesizer simulator’s modular interfaces localize
each extension, while the fixed pipelines of existing simulators require changes across tightly coupled components to
represent interactions among Mamba, MoE, and transformer
layers.
Because the coding agent, harness, specifications, and profiling data are identical across all three systems, the accuracy
difference isolates the contribution of the underlying simulator.
Overall, Simthesizer achieves an average throughput error of
2.51%, whereas the baseline-built extensions exhibit 6.03%,
showing that Simthesizer faithfully adds functionality absent
from Simthesizer simulator and that Simthesizer simulator provides a more effective foundation for agent-driven extension.
(Q3) Impact of the Synthesizer agent harness. Table IV
compares Simthesizer after Synthesizer agent adds speculative
decoding with and without its harness, using the ShareGPT
workload and the Qwen3 32B model. Without the harness,
simulation error rises by 1.65×–3.69× across throughput
and latency metrics. This occurs because the coding agent
frequently omits critical system details and proceeds to implementation despite insufficient specifications. In contrast, the
harness supplies a knowledge base, blocks implementation
until required specifications are resolved, and enforces selfvalidation through its verification loop. Because this comparison holds Simthesizer simulator, the coding agent, and
all inputs fixed, the error reduction quantifies the harness’s
contribution to accuracy.
(Q4) Simulation speed. Figure 11 compares the execution
time of Simthesizer, LLMServingSim2.0, and Vidur across
the three extension tasks under the ShareGPT workload.
Simthesizer runs on average 164.9× (up to 284.96×) faster
than LLMServingSim2.0 and 6.65× (up to 23.19×) faster
than Vidur. This gap arises from how each extension is implemented. Existing simulators expose no modular boundaries for
new mechanisms, so extension logic is built directly into their
simulation pipelines, adding overhead to every simulated iteration. In contrast, on Simthesizer, the same extensions remain
confined to localized component changes behind Simthesizer
simulator’s interfaces, leaving the execution engine untouched.
For hybrid Mamba, Simthesizer takes longer than on the other
tasks because Simthesizer simulator normally simulates one
transformer layer and reuses its latency across repeated layers,
whereas the heterogeneous layers of hybrid Mamba leads
Simthesizer simulator to simulate every layer individually. Explicit request of this reuse would further reduce the simulation

Error rate (%)

TTFT
10.73
4.52

100
80
60
40
20
0

LLMServingSim2.0

Vidur

ut T T L
ut T T L
ut T T L
hp TTF TPO IT ghp TTF TPO IT ghp TTF TPO IT
ug
rou
rou
h
h
T
T
KV Quant
Hybrid-Mamba
Speculative

ro
Th

(a) Mean
Error rate (%)

Error rate (%) Throughput
Without Harness
4.70
With Harness
2.84

Simthesizer

80
60
40
20
0

TTFT TPOT ITL
KV Quant

TTFT TPOT ITL
Speculative

TTFT TPOT ITL
Hybrid-Mamba

(b) Median
Fig. 10. Error rate comparison of (a) mean and (b) median performance
metrics for Simthesizer, LLMServingSim2.0, and Vidur across three featureextension tasks under a shared harness and coding agent.
Simthesizer

Simulation time (s)

TABLE IV
E RROR RATES OF S IMTHESIZER WITH AND WITHOUT THE S YNTHESIZER
AGENT HARNESS , RELATIVE TO THE REAL V LLM- BASED SERVING
SYSTEM .

LLMServingSim2.0

2400
2200
50

Vidur
2326

429

225
33

25
0

19

KV Quant

Speculative

23

Hybrid-Mamba

Fig. 11. Comparison of simulation time for Simthesizer, LLMServingSim2.0,
and Vidur across three feature-extension tasks.

time, yet even without it, Simthesizer models hybrid Mamba
more accurately than both baselines.
(Q5) Coding-agent generality. Figure 12 compares the generation throughput of vLLM with that of the simulators produced
by Codex and Claude Code (Opus 4.7 high, v2.1.204) for
speculative decoding. Both simulators closely follow the realsystem trajectory, achieving average error rates of 4.1% and
4.9%, respectively, across throughput, TTFT, TPOT, and ITL.
This generality follows from the agent- and LLM-agnostic
harness design, which relies on no agent-specific tools or
prompting strategies and applies the same specification-toimplementation and validation workflow to any coding agent.
These results show that Synthesizer agent generalizes beyond
Codex, guiding different coding agents to faithful extensions.
VIII. R ELATED W ORK
LLM and system simulators. ADOR [18], ONNXim [11],
LLMCompass [55], and PyTorchSim [49] simulate LLM
workloads at the hardware level to explore architectural design
spaces. At the system level, Vidur [1], APEX [28], and
LLMServingSim2.0 [6] model LLM serving across nodes and
devices, while vTrain [3], TrioSim [22], and Multiverse [10]
target distributed training. Across all these levels, however,
human developers implement system behavior in advance and
fix it into a simulation pipeline, so every emerging mechanism

Generation
Throughput (tok/s)

vLLM

Simthesizer (Codex)

Simthesizer (Claude)

40

120

3K
2K
1K
0

0

20

60

80
100
Time (s)

140

160

Fig. 12. Generation throughput comparison between vLLM and the simulators
produced by Codex and Claude Code for speculative decoding.

triggers another round of manual restructuring and revalidation. In contrast, Simthesizer composes the complete serving
workflow from uniform elements of a unified dynamic DAG,
and integrates new mechanisms by adding and connecting
nodes through agent-driven lowering.
AI agents for systems research. KNighter [48] synthesizes
static-analysis checkers, AIOpsLab [4] evaluates agents for
autonomous cloud operation, LOOPRAG [57] and LLMVectorizer [43] vectorize loops, and CUDAForge [56] and KernelEvolve [26] generate and optimize GPU kernels. Simthesizer further demonstrates that coding agents can be applied
to develop an LLM serving simulator, showing the feasibility
of agent-based development and optimization through artifacts
and workflows co-designed for agents.
IX. C ONCLUSION
This paper presents Simthesizer, a framework for developing
LLM serving simulators that keep pace with fast-evolving,
non-monolithic serving. Simthesizer introduces a composable
simulator infrastructure that uniformly expresses the complete
serving workflow, including its control decisions, realized as
a unified dynamic DAG (Simthesizer simulator), and lowers
high-level specifications into executable extensions through a
harnessed coding agent (Synthesizer agent). Extensions synthesized on Simthesizer achieve an average throughput error of
2.51%, compared with 6.03% for the same extensions built on
existing simulators, while simulating up to 23.19×–284.96×
faster. These results suggest that pairing composable simulator
infrastructure with agent-driven lowering offers a scalable path
toward building simulators in other rapidly evolving systems
domains.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Agrawal, N. Kedia, J. Mohan, A. Panwar, N. Kwatra, B. S. Gulavani,
R. Ramjee, and A. Tumanov, “VIDUR: A LARGE-SCALE SIMULATION FRAMEWORK FOR LLM INFERENCE,” in MLSys, 2024.
[2] A. Agrawal, N. Kedia, A. Panwar, J. Mohan, N. Kwatra, B. S. Gulavani,
A. Tumanov, and R. Ramjee, “Taming Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in
LLM Inference with Sarathi-Serve,” OSDI, 2024.
[3] J. Bang, Y. Choi, M. Kim, Y. Kim, and M. Rhu, “vTrain: A Simulation
Framework for Evaluating Cost-Effective and Compute-Optimal Large
Language Model Training,” in MICRO, 2024.
[4] Y. Chen, M. Shetty, G. Somashekar, M. Ma, Y. Simmhan, J. Mace,
C. Bansal, R. Wang, and S. Rajmohan, “AIOpsLab: A Holistic Framework to Evaluate AI Agents for Enabling Autonomous Clouds,” in
MLSys, 2025.
[5] E. Cho, J. Bang, R. Hwang, and M. Rhu, “ PASCAL: A Phase-Aware
Scheduling Algorithm for Serving Reasoning-based Large Language
Models,” in HPCA, 2026.

[6] J. Cho, H. Choi, G. Heo, and J. Park, “LLMServingSim 2.0: A
Unified Simulator for Heterogeneous and Disaggregated LLM Serving
Infrastructure,” in ISPASS, 2026.
[7] J. Cho, M. Kim, H. Choi, G. Heo, and J. Park, “LLMServingSim: A
HW/SW Co-Simulation Infrastructure for LLM Inference Serving at
Scale,” in IISWC, 2024.
[8] B. Gao, Z. He, P. Sharma, Q. Kang, D. Jevdjic, J. Deng, X. Yang,
Z. Yu, and P. Zuo, “Cost-Efficient Large Language Model Serving for
Multi-turn Conversations with CachedAttention,” in ATC, 2024.
[9] I. Gim, Z. Ma, S.-s. Lee, and L. Zhong, “Pie: A Programmable Serving
System for Emerging LLM Applications,” in SOSP, 2025.
[10] F. Gui, K. Gao, L. Chen, D. Li, V. Liu, R. Zhang, H. Yang, and D. Xiong,
“Accelerating design space exploration for LLM training systems with
multi-experiment parallel simulation,” in NSDI, 2025.
[11] H. Ham, W. Yang, Y. Shin, O. Woo, G. Heo, S. Lee, J. Park, and
G. Kim, “ONNXim: A Fast, Cycle-Level Multi-Core NPU Simulator,”
IEEE Computer Architecture Letters, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 219–222, 2024.
[12] T. R. Henderson, M. Lacage, G. F. Riley, C. Dowell, and J. Kopena,
“Network simulations with the ns-3 simulator,” SIGCOMM demonstration, vol. 14, no. 14, p. 527, 2008.
[13] S. Hong, M. Zhuge, J. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Cheng, J. Wang, C. Zhang,
Z. Wang, S. K. S. Yau, Z. Lin, L. Zhou, C. Ran, L. Xiao, C. Wu,
and J. Schmidhuber, “MetaGPT: Meta Programming for A Multi-Agent
Collaborative Framework,” in ICLR, 2024.
[14] J. Jeong and J. Ahn, “Accelerating LLM Serving for Multi-turn Dialogues with Efficient Resource Management,” in ASPLOS, 2025.
[15] C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and
K. Narasimhan, “Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world
github issues?” in International Conference on Learning Representations, vol. 2024, 2024, pp. 54 107–54 157.
[16] A. K. Kamath, R. Prabhu, J. Mohan, S. Peter, R. Ramjee, and
A. Panwar, “POD-Attention: Unlocking Full Prefill-Decode Overlap
for Faster LLM Inference,” in ASPLOS, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://asplos-conference.org/asplos2025/program.html
[17] M. Khairy, Z. Shen, T. M. Aamodt, and T. G. Rogers, “Accel-Sim:
An Extensible Simulation Framework for Validated GPU Modeling,” in
ISCA, 2020.
[18] J. Kim, H. Lee, G. Ko, G. Choi, S. Ham, S. Hong, and J.-Y. Kim,
“ADOR: A Design Exploration Framework for LLM Serving with
Enhanced Latency and Throughput,” in ISPASS, 2025.
[19] W. Kim, Y. Lee, Y. Kim, J. Hwang, S. Oh, J. Jung, A. Huseynov,
W. G. Park, C. H. Park, D. Mahajan, and J. Park, “Pimba: A Processingin-Memory Acceleration for Post-Transformer Large Language Model
Serving,” in MICRO, 2025.
[20] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. Gonzalez,
H. Zhang, and I. Stoica, “Efficient Memory Management for Large
Language Model Serving with PagedAttention,” in SOSP, 2023.
[21] Y. Leviathan, M. Kalman, and Y. Matias, “Fast Inference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding,” in ICML, 2023.
[22] Y. Li, Y. Bao, G. Wang, X. Mei, P. Vaid, A. Ghosh, A. Jog, D. Bunandar,
A. Joshi, and Y. Sun, “TrioSim: A Lightweight Simulator for LargeScale DNN Workloads on Multi-GPU Systems,” in ISCA, 2025.
[23] Y. Li, F. Wei, C. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “EAGLE-2: Faster Inference of
Language Models with Dynamic Draft Trees,” in EMNLP, 2024.
[24] Y. Li, F. Wei, C. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “EAGLE: Speculative Sampling
Requires Rethinking Feature Uncertainty,” in ICML, 2024.
[25] Y. Li, F. Wei, C. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “EAGLE-3: Scaling up Inference
Acceleration of Large Language Models via Training-Time Test,” in
NeurIPS, 2025.
[26] G. Liao, H. Qin, Y. Wang, A. Golden, M. Kuchnik, Y. Yetim, J. J. Ang,
C. Fu, Y. He, S. Hsia, Z. Jiang, D. Li, U. Pashkevich, V. Puvvada,
F. Shi, M. Steiner, R. Xiao, N. Yan, X. Yu, Z. Fang, R. Levenstein,
K. Ho, H. Zhu, A. Hammond, R. Li, A. Mathews, K. Gondkar,
A. Zainul-Abedin, K. Singh, H. Yu, W. Chi, B. Huang, S. Zhang,
N. Weller, Z. Marine, W. Cook, C.-J. Wu, and G. Liu, “KernelEvolve:
Scaling Agentic Kernel Coding for Heterogeneous AI Accelerators at
Meta,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.23236
[27] C. Lin, Z. Han, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, F. Yang, C. Chen, and L. Qiu,
“Parrot: Efficient Serving of LLM-based Applications with Semantic
Variable,” in OSDI, 2024.
[28] Y.-C. Lin, W. Kwon, R. Pineda, and F. N. Paravecino, “APEX:
An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for Automated
Parallel Execution in LLM Serving,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17651

[29] Meta AI, “Llama 3.1 8B Instruct,” https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, Jul. 2024, accessed: 2026-04-09.
[30] X. Miao, G. Oliaro, Z. Zhang, X. Cheng, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, R. Y. Y.
Wong, A. Zhu, L. Yang, X. Shi, C. Shi, Z. Chen, D. Arfeen, R. Abhyankar, and Z. Jia, “SpecInfer: Accelerating Large Language Model
Serving with Tree-based Speculative Inference and Verification,” in
ASPLOS, 2024.
[31] NVIDIA Corporation, “NVIDIA Nemotron-3 Nano 30B A3B
BF16,” https://huggingface.co/nvidia/NVIDIA-Nemotron-3-Nano-30BA3B-BF16, Dec. 2025, accessed: 2026-04-09.
[32] G. Oliaro, Z. Jia, D. F. Campos, and A. Qiao, “SuffixDecoding: Extreme
Speculative Decoding for Emerging AI Applications,” in NeurIPS, 2025.
[33] OpenAI, “Codex,” https://openai.com/codex/, 2025.
[34] P. Patel, E. Choukse, C. Zhang, A. Shah, I. n. Goiri, S. Maleki, and
R. Bianchini, “Splitwise: Efficient Generative LLM Inference Using
Phase Splitting,” in ISCA, 2024.
[35] R. Prabhu, A. Nayak, J. Mohan, R. Ramjee, and A. Panwar, “vAttention:
Dynamic Memory Management for Serving LLMs without PagedAttention,” in ASPLOS, 2025.
[36] S. Rashidi, S. Sridharan, S. Srinivasan, and T. Krishna, “ASTRA-SIM:
Enabling SW/HW Co-Design Exploration for Distributed DL Training
Platforms,” in ISPASS, 2020.
[37] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessi, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Hambro,
L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language
Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools,” in NeurIPS, 2023.
[38] ShareGPT Team, “ShareGPT,” https://sharegpt.com, 2023, accessed:
2026-04-09.
[39] Y. Shen, K. Song, X. Tan, D. Li, W. Lu, and Y. Zhuang, “HuggingGPT:
Solving AI Tasks with ChatGPT and its Friends in Hugging Face,” in
NeurIPS, 2023.
[40] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao,
“Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning,” in
NeurIPS, 2023.
[41] B. Sun, Z. Huang, H. Zhao, W. Xiao, X. Zhang, Y. Li, and W. Lin,
“Llumnix: Dynamic Scheduling for Large Language Model Serving,” in
OSDI, 2024.
[42] Y. Sun, T. Baruah, S. A. Mojumder, S. Dong, X. Gong, S. Treadway,
Y. Bao, S. Hance, C. McCardwell, V. Zhao, H. Barclay, A. K. Ziabari,
Z. Chen, R. Ubal, J. L. Abellán, J. Kim, A. Joshi, and D. Kaeli, “MGPUSim: enabling multi-GPU performance modeling and optimization,”
in ISCA, 2019.
[43] J. Taneja, A. Laird, C. Yan, M. Musuvathi, and S. K. Lahiri, “LLMVectorizer: LLM-Based Verified Loop Vectorizer,” in CGO, 2025.
[44] J. Wang, J. Han, X. Wei, S. Shen, D. Zhang, C. Fang, R. Chen, W. Yu,
and H. Chen, “{KVCache} Cache in the Wild: Characterizing and
Optimizing {KVCache} Cache at a Large Cloud Provider,” in ATC,
2025.
[45] B. Wu, S. Liu, Y. Zhong, P. Sun, X. Liu, and X. Jin, “LoongServe:
Efficiently Serving Long-Context Large Language Models with Elastic
Sequence Parallelism,” in SOSP, 2024.
[46] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang,
S. Zhang, J. Liu, A. H. Awadallah, R. W. White, D. Burger, and
C. Wang, “AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via MultiAgent Conversations,” in COLM, 2024.
[47] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao,
C. Huang, C. Lv, C. Zheng, D. Liu, F. Zhou, F. Huang, F. Hu, H. Ge,
H. Wei, H. Lin, J. Tang, J. Yang, J. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yang,
J. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Dang, K. Bao, K. Yang, L. Yu, L. Deng,
M. Li, M. Xue, M. Li, P. Zhang, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Men, R. Gao,
S. Liu, S. Luo, T. Li, T. Tang, W. Yin, X. Ren, X. Wang, X. Zhang,
X. Ren, Y. Fan, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Wang,
Z. Cui, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and Z. Qiu, “Qwen3 Technical Report,”
2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388
[48] C. Yang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xie, H. Li, and L. Zhang, “KNighter: Transforming
Static Analysis with LLM-Synthesized Checkers,” in SOSP, 2025.
[49] W. Yang, Y. Shin, O. Woo, G. Park, H. Ham, J. Kang, J. Park, and
G. Kim, “PyTorchSim: A Comprehensive, Fast, and Accurate NPU
Simulation Framework,” in MICRO, 2025.
[50] S. Yao, N. Shinn, P. Razavi, and K. R. Narasimhan, “τ -bench: A
Benchmark for Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World Domains,”
in ICLR, 2025.
[51] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao,
“ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models,” in
ICLR, 2023.

[52] X. Yao, Q. Hu, and A. Klimovic, “DeltaZip: Efficient Serving of
Multiple Full-Model-Tuned LLMs,” in EuroSys, 2025.
[53] G.-I. Yu, J. S. Jeong, G.-W. Kim, S. Kim, and B.-G. Chun, “Orca: A
Distributed Serving System for Transformer-Based Generative Models,”
in OSDI, 2022.
[54] L. Yu, J. Lin, and J. Li, “Stateful Large Language Model Serving with
Pensieve,” in EuroSys, 2025.
[55] H. Zhang, A. Ning, R. B. Prabhakar, and D. Wentzlaff, “LLMCompass: Enabling Efficient Hardware Design for Large Language Model
Inference,” in ISCA, 2025.
[56] Z. Zhang, R. Wang, S. Li, Y. Luo, M. Hong, and C. Ding,
“CudaForge: An Agent Framework with Hardware Feedback for CUDA
Kernel Optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01884, 2025. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.01884
[57] Y. Zhi, Y. Cao, J. Dai, X. Han, J. Pu, Q. Wu, S. Cheng, and
M. Cai, “LOOPRAG: Enhancing Loop Transformation Optimization
with Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models,” in ASPLOS, 2026.
[58] Y. Zhong, S. Liu, J. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, X. Jin, and H. Zhang,
“DistServe: Disaggregating Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-optimized
Large Language Model Serving,” in OSDI, 2024.
[59] K. Zhu, Y. Gao, Y. Zhao, L. Zhao, G. Zuo, Y. Gu, D. Xie, T. Tang, Q. Xu,
Z. Ye, K. Kamahori, C.-Y. Lin, Z. Wang, S. Wang, A. Krishnamurthy,
and B. Kasikci, “NanoFlow: Towards Optimal Large Language Model
Serving Throughput,” in OSDI, 2025.
[60] R. Zhu, Z. Jiang, C. Jin, P. Wu, C. A. Stuardo, D. Wang, X. Zhang,
H. Zhou, H. Wei, Y. Cheng, J. Xiao, X. Zhang, L. Liu, H. Lin, L.-W.
Chang, J. Ye, X. Yu, X. Liu, X. Jin, and X. Liu, “MegaScale-Infer:
Efficient Mixture-of-Experts Model Serving with Disaggregated Expert
Parallelism,” in SIGCOMM, 2025.

